>> Never before have we lived
so out of sync with the rhythms
of nature.
Can the resulting damage
to our health be reversed?
The new science of
circadian medicine
shows great promise
in doing just that.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Until the Industrial Revolution,
humans lived in accordance
with the natural cycles of light
and dark, or circadian rhythms.
That all changed with
the advent of electricity
and artificial light.
Today, our modern
lifestyles, and especially
our exposure to blue light
from electronic devices,
have been making
a major impact on
our internal biological clocks.
Research in an
emerging field called
circadian medicine
is finding that there
are ways to reset
our circadian systems
and bring us back into balance.
Dr. John Douillard is a
renowned Ayurvedic practitioner
who has been
following the latest
developments in the
field and incorporating
what he calls circadian wisdom
in his practice for years.
>> So the research is telling us
that there is biological clocks
in pretty much every
cell of our body.
But those biological clocks
have to stay-- like every clock,
you have to set the clock
to make sure it's right
and telling the right time.
So the biological
clocks are in sync
with the circadian
rhythms, which
are the light/dark cycles,
both daytime light/dark
cycles and the seasonal
light/dark cycles.
And they're really regulated
by a molecule called melatonin.
When you see light, the
melatonin levels shut down
and things like vitamin D that
you get from the sun activate.
Cortisone levels activate.
So the body gets
energized during the day.
In the nighttime, when the sun
sets, the opposite happens.
Your cortisone levels
start dialing down,
because melatonin levels,
as darkness approaches,
starts to increase.
>> As most people today extend
their bedtime way past sunset
and are exposed to blue light
from electronics throughout
the day, their melatonin
production is drastically
lowered at night when
it's most needed.
And as numerous recent
studies have shown,
this can cause significant
circadian dysregulation.
>> If you're not allowing
your circadian cycles to kick
in, those certain biological
clocks won't turn on or turn
off at the right time.
And then you're
going into what's
called a circadian
medicine imbalance.
I wrote an article
about, you know,
the things that can happen with
a circadian medicine imbalance.
So we have excess blue
light and low melatonin,
which happens with teenagers
and people who are up a lot.
And the main symptom was
anxiety, worry, depression,
obviously insomnia.
Melatonin is the
detoxifier of your brain.
Your brain drains 3 pounds
of plaque and garbage
out of your head every
year while you sleep.
Now, if you're not
getting enough melatonin
to do the night janitor
detox and rebuild and repair
and rejuvenate,
then you're going
to start to accumulate more
toxicity in your brain.
>> The field of circadian
medicine came out of studies
that showed that certain
medications work better
at different times of day.
This research won a
Nobel Prize in 2017.
It has since been generating
further exploration
of circadian regulation and the
behavioral and pharmaceutical
interventions that
may promote it.
For John Douillard,
these insights
have always been a central focus
of the ancient Indian science
of Ayurveda.
>> What I love about the
circadian medicine science is
that it's starting to match
up with some of the Ayurvedic
principles.
I call it the daily
Ayurvedic clock.
You know, in Ayurveda, there's
a thing called prakash sandhi.
And prakash sandhi means
the junction of light.
And the junction of light
is sunrise and sunset.
>> The new circadian medicine
research points to other
lifestyle factors also
prescribed by Ayurveda.
>> The ideal day would be waking
up before the sun would rise.
Then you can do some yoga,
some breathing, meditation.
That would be a great thing
to do to start the day.
Then after that, breakfast.
After you have your breakfast,
probably the most important
thing we can do after we eat
our food is go for a walk.
Then a nice big relaxing
lunch somewhere in the middle
of the day would be ideal.
Then in the afternoon, you
know, with a full tank of gas,
if you eat it in
a relaxed way, you
won't get tired
after that big meal.
Then a light supper, if needed.
If you're calorie restricted
or intermittent fasting,
that would be the meal to miss.
But you definitely want
to get to bed early.
You want to get to bed
usually before 10 o'clock.
And then you're going to burn
fat all night long and break
the fast in the morning
with that next breakfast.
That's the way the
circadian clock works.
And that's what Ayurveda
predicted thousands
and thousands of years ago.
>> For a complete reset
of one's biological clock,
studies have shown that time
in nature may be the solution.
>> You know, one week of
camping with no cell phones
and artificial light, up with
the sun, bed with the sun,
reset the circadian
rhythms 100%.
You can do that at home.
I call it a no artificial
light weekend, where you just
turn off all the wi-fi,
don't use any electricity.
Use candles.
And just for an entire weekend,
just go off the grid 100%.
And according to
the research, you
got a 68% restoration of
your circadian rhythms.
>> With groundbreaking new
research into topics like
the effects of melatonin and
the impact of the microbiome
on the biological clock, the
future of circadian medicine is
promising.
>> I think the future of
circadian medicine is where
Ayurveda was thousands of
years ago and still is.
They talked about these
rhythms in such great detail.
And it was the most
important thing
to do is live in sync
with the rhythms.
To be out of sync was to
be out of balance, which
means to be distracted, to
be unhappy, to be, you know,
unable to digest and all
these imbalances of health.
And that's what Ayurveda
was really about
is to bring the
body into balance.
Realize it's like a subtle
energy perceiving instrument.
And if we keep it
in balance, the body
can perceive the
difference between being
in circadian rhythm and
out of circadian rhythm.
And circadian medicine
is about us getting--
taking the struggle
out and getting
us to go downstream
with the current.
So, we're headed, you
know, towards the ocean
where you're ultimately free.
>> For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."